#summary Installing gmpy2 on Linux.
#labels Phase-Deploy

*Note: These instructions assume source revision r509 or later is used. They do NOT apply to the 2.0.0a1 source release.*

=Compiling gmpy2 on Linux=

==Requirements==

*gmpy2* has only been tested with the most recent versions of GMP (or MPIR) and (optionally) MPFR. Specifically, for integer and rational support, *gmpy2* requires either GMP 5.0.x or later, or MPIR 2.2 or later. To support multiple precision floating point arithmetic, MPFR 3.0.x is required. A future release of *gmpy2* will support multiple precision complex arithmetic using MPC.

If MPFR is not available, *gmpy2* will only support integer and rational arithmetic. The _mpf_ type included with GMP is no longer supported.

==Short Instructions==

If your Linux distribution includes sufficiently recent versions of GMP and MPFR, and you have the development libraries installed, compiling should be as simple as:

{{{
cd <gmpy2 source directory>
python setup.py install
}}}

If this fails, read on.

==Detailed Instructions==

If your Linux distribution does not support recent versions of GMP or MPFR, you will need to compile your own versions. To avoid any possible conflict with existing libraries on your system, the following instructions install GMP and MPFR to a location in your home directory.

===Compiling GMP and MPFR===

  # Create the desired destination directory for GMP and MPFR.
{{{
$ mkdir /home/case/local
}}}
  # Download and un-tar the GMP source code. Change to GMP source directory and compile GMP.
{{{
$ cd ~/src/gmp-5.0.2
$ ./configure --prefix=/home/case/local
$ make
$ make check
$ make install
}}}
  # Download and un-tar the MPFR source code. Change to MPFR source directory and compile MPFR.
{{{
$ cd ~/src/mpfr-3.0.1
$ ./configure --prefix=/home/case/local --with-gmp=/home/case/local
$ make
$ make check
$ make install
}}}
  # Compile *gmpy2* and specify the location of GMP and MPFR.
{{{
$ python setup.py build_ext -Ddir=/home/case/local install
}}}
  # If you get a "permission denied" error message, you may need to use
{{{
$ sudo python setup.py build_ext -Ddir=/home/case/local install
}}}